\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename ilist.info
@settitle IList
@c %**end of header
@copying
Display a list in an Ibuffer way.

Copyright @copyright{} 2021  Durand

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3
or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.
A copy of the license is included in the section entitled ``GNU
Free Documentation License''.

A copy of the license is also available from the Free Software
Foundation Web site at @url{https://www.gnu.org/licenses/fdl.html}.

@end quotation

The document was typeset with
@uref{https://www.gnu.org/software/texinfo/, GNU Texinfo}.

@end copying

@titlepage
@title IList
@subtitle Display a list in an Ibuffer way.
@author Durand <mmemmew@@gmail.com>
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c Output the table of the contents at the beginning.
@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top, About, (dir), (dir)
@top IList

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@c Generate the nodes for this menu with `C-c C-u C-m'.
@menu
* About::
* Entry point::
* Mapping over lines::
* Moving::
* Packages using IList::
* Copying This Manual::
* Index::
@end menu

@syncodeindex fn cp
@syncodeindex vr cp

@c Update all node entries with `C-c C-u C-n'.
@c Insert new nodes with `C-c C-c n'.
@node About, Entry point, Top, Top
@chapter About

@cindex description
@cindex functionality
@cindex use

This is a little library package that can @emph{display a list in an
Ibuffer fashion}.  The core functionality it provides is a function
that can accept a list, and produce a string showing the contents of
the list according to the specifications of columns, groups, and
sorters.

@node Entry point, Mapping over lines, About, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Entry point

@cindex entry point
@findex ilist-string

The one main function this package provides is @code{ilist-string}.
It is called as follows.

@cindex signature of ilist-string
@cindex how to call

@lisp
(ilist-string LIST COLUMNS GROUPS
    &optional DISCARD-EMPTY-P SORTER NO-TRAILING-SPACE)
@end lisp

@table@code
@item LIST
This denotes the list that the user wants to display.
@item COLUMNS
@itemx GROUPS
See @ref{Columns} and @ref{Groups}.
@item DISCARD-EMPTY-P
This determines whether to display empty groups or not.
@item SORTER
@cindex sorting elements
This is either nil, or a function with two arguments which returns
non-nil if and only if the first argument should be sorted before the
second argument.  This is used to sort the elements in the list,
before grouping happens.  To sort groups, see @ref{Groups}.
@item NO-TRAILING-SPACE
If this is non-nil then there will be no trailing whitespaces in the
resulting string.
@end table

@menu
* Columns::
* Groups::
@end menu

@node Columns, Groups, Entry point, Entry point
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Columns

@cindex columns of the display
@cindex column, specification

Like in Ibuffer, the user can specify columns to display.  Each column
comprises the following specifications:

@table@code
@item NAME
The name to display in the header.
@item FUN
A function that will be given the elements of the list (one at a time)
that should return a string as the representation of that element in
this column.
@item MIN
@itemx MAX
The minimal (resp. maximal) width this column takes.
@item ALIGN
Either :left, :right, or :center.  How the contents of the column are
aligned.
@item ELIDE
@cindex eliding string
If the content of an element takes more space than the MAX, whether to
substitute the last few characters of that content by a fixed
@emph{eliding string}.  If this ELIDE is not a string, then it means
not to elide, but to truncate the contents.
@end table

@node Groups,  , Columns, Entry point
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Groups

@cindex filter groups

There are two types of filter groups: the fixed and the automatic
filter groups.

@menu
* Fixed groups::
* Automatic groups::
* Define automatic filter groups::
@end menu

@node Fixed groups, Automatic groups, Groups, Groups
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection Fixed groups

@cindex fixed filter groups

Like in Ibuffer, we can group elements together in the display.  One
difference with Ibuffer is that elements that are not in any group are
ignored.  If one wants a "default" group, specify that explicitly.  The
specifications of @code{GROUPS} are as follows.

@cindex fixed filter groups, specification

@table @code
@item NAME
The name of the group.  This will be enclosed in square brackets and
displayed on a separate line.
@item FUN
A function with one argument.  If the function returns non-nil, then
that element is considered to pertain to the group.
@end table

@cindex fixed filter groups, default group

So a default group just uses a function that always returns @code{t},
and is put at the end of the list @code{GROUPS}.

Empty groups might or might not be displayed, depending on the value
of @code{DISCARD-EMPTY-P}.

@node Automatic groups, Define automatic filter groups, Fixed groups, Groups
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection Automatic groups

@cindex automatic filter groups, mechanism

An automatic filter group is a function that can give labels to
elements in a list.  These labels will be used to group elements
automatically: the elements with the same label will be grouped
together, automagically.  Besides, an automatic filter group is also
responsible for sorting group labels, and for giving a default label,
if no labels are specified for some element.

To be precise, an automatic filter group is a function with the
signature: @code{(ELEMENT &optional TYPE)}.  The optional argument
@code{TYPE} says what the caller wants from the function:

@cindex automatic filter groups, types

@table@code
@item nil
If it is omitted or nil, the function should just return the label for
@code{ELEMENT}.
@item default
If it is the symbol @code{default}, the function should return a
default label.
@item sorter
If it is the symbol @code{sorter}, the function should return a
function with two arguments, @code{X} and @code{Y}.  This returned
function should return a non-nil value if and only if group @code{X}
should be placed earlier than group @code{Y}.
@end table

@cindex automatic filter groups, example call

So, for example, the call @code{(FUN t 'default)} should produce the
default label, @code{(FUN t 'sorter)} should return the function used
to sort groups, and @code{(FUN ELEMENT)} should return the label for
@code{ELEMENT}, where @code{FUN} is an automatic filter group.

@node Define automatic filter groups,  , Automatic groups, Groups
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection Define automatic filter groups

@cindex custom automatic filter groups
@cindex define automatic filter groups
@findex ilist-define-automatic-group
@findex ilist-dag

If one wants to define ones own automatic filter group, then the macro
@code{ilist-define-automatic-group}, or the shorter alias
@code{ilist-dag}, might come in handy.

In case you wonder, this @emph{dag} has nothing to do with an
@emph{directed acyclic graph}; it is just an abbreviation to save some
typing.  The coincidence of the names is a misfortune.

@cindex signature of ilist-define-automatic-group

This macro is called as follows.

@lisp
(ilist-dag NAME DEFAULT SORTER &rest BODY)
@end lisp

@table @code
@item NAME
This is a string.  The resulting function defined by this macro will
be named as @code{ilist-automatic-group-NAME}.
@item DEFAULT
This is also a string.  It is used to label elements for which this
automatic group returns nil as its label.

@cindex reason for using default in automatic groups

Why not just let the automatic group function give the default label
instead of nil, then?  Well, people make mistakes all the time, at
least I do.  So I think this mechanism can help people to remember
give a default label for elements.
@item SORTER
This should be a function, or the symbol of a function.

@cindex ilist-dag sorter convention

This will be used as the sorting function of the group labels.  The
sorter function should accept two arguments, and should return a non-nil
value if and only if the group labelled by the first argument should be
displayed before the group labelled by the second argument.
@end table

@node Mapping over lines, Moving, Entry point, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Mapping over lines

@cindex mapping
@cindex loop through display
@findex ilist-map-lines

For the convenience of package-users, this package also provides some
auxiliary functions to operate on the displayed list.  One is
@code{ilist-map-lines}.  Its return value is the list of execution
results on the lines over which the function is executed.  By default
it skips invisible lines, but this behaviour can be alterred.

It is called as follows.

@cindex signature of ilist-map-lines

@lisp
(ilist-map-lines FUN &optional PREDICATE START END NO-SKIP-INVISIBLE)
@end lisp

@table @code
@item FUN
The function to execute on each matching line.
@item PREDICATE
This should be a function with no arguments.  It will be executed on
each line.  If it returns non-nil, that line is considered to be
matched.
@item START
@itemx END
They limit the range of the mapping.
@item NO-SKIP-INVISIBLE
If non-nil, then we don’t skip invisible lines.
@end table

@node Moving, Packages using IList, Mapping over lines, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Moving

@cindex moving around
@cindex navigations
@cindex round buffer

It might be desired to move between the displayed list items in a
@emph{cyclic} manner, that is, assuming the top of the buffer is
identified with the bottom of the buffer.  So the package provides
four functions for moving.  These functions all have an argument
@code{NO-SKIP-INVISIBLE}; if that argument is non-nil, then invisible
lines won't skipped.

@findex ilist-forward-line
@findex ilist-backward-line
@findex ilist-forward-group-header
@findex ilist-backward-group-header

@table @code
@item ilist-backward-line
@itemx ilist-forward-line
Move between lines.  One can control whether to skip group headers or
to move cyclicly, through the function parameters.
@item ilist-backward-group-header
@itemx ilist-forward-group-header
Move between group headers.
@end table

@node Packages using IList, Copying This Manual, Moving, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Packages using IList

The packages that use this library IList, which I know of, are listed
here:

@cindex blist
- BList (https://www.gitlab.com/mmemmew/blist)

@cindex suggestion
If you know about other packages that use IList, or if you write a
package using IList, it is welcomed to suggest to list those packages
here.

@node Copying This Manual, Index, Packages using IList, Top
@appendix Copying This Manual

@c Get fdl.texi from https://www.gnu.org/licenses/fdl.html
@include fdl-1.3.texi

@node Index,  , Copying This Manual, Top
@appendix Index

@printindex cp

@bye
